feat: Implement Beyla as a subprocess (simple) (#6695)
grafana/alloy: docs/developer/updating-beyla.md

# Updating Beyla

> > **Maintainers only.** Bumping Beyla records new binary checksums in
> > `beyla_version.yaml` — the trust anchor for verifying the download. Run
> > `make update-beyla` and review the checksum diff only as a maintainer, to guard
> > against supply-chain tampering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Only maintainers should update Beyla** 
> Bumping Beyla records new binary checksums in `beyla_version.yaml`.
> To guard against supply-chain attacks, only maintainers should change the Beyla binaries that Alloy incorporates.
> If a community PR is opened for this, maintainers should close it and reopen a new one made by a maintainer.
```

`internal/component/beyla/ebpf/internal/config/gen/beyla/beyla_version.yaml` (read by
the `Makefile`). Alloy translates the component config to Beyla's YAML with hand-written Go in
`internal/component/beyla/ebpf/internal/config`
([README](../../internal/component/beyla/ebpf/internal/config/gen/README.md)); the
config surface is intentionally not a 1:1 mirror of Beyla's YAML.

## Bumping the version

```
make update-beyla TAG=<beyla-version>    # e.g. TAG=v3.29.0
```

This one command:

- records the version and each release tarball's sha256 in
  `internal/component/beyla/ebpf/internal/config/gen/beyla/beyla_version.yaml` (the
  pinned manifest),
- downloads and verifies the binaries against those checksums,
- downloads the matching config schema,
- syncs the version into `docs/sources/_index.md.t` and `docs/sources/_index.md`.

Review the `beyla_version.yaml` diff before committing — the committed checksum is the
trust anchor, like `go.sum`.

## Updating the config translation

Reconcile the hand-written types and translation with any new or changed Beyla
options. Two checks guard this:

- **`golden_test.go`** locks the full emitted YAML byte-for-byte (regenerate with

>   `UPDATE_GOLDEN=1` when a translation change is intended).

Reviewer: Feels like the update of the golden config should also be part of the above "make update-beyla" command? Otherwise we could foget to update it?

# Updating Beyla

> 

Reviewer: We could put a note at the top to state that this action can only be done by maintainers, to prevent issues with supply chain attacks.

Author: done

## Overview

`beyla.ebpf` embeds a downloaded [Beyla](https://github.com/grafana/beyla) binary and
runs it as a subprocess. The version is pinned by `BEYLA_VERSION` in the `Makefile`.
Alloy translates the component config to Beyla's YAML with hand-written Go in
`internal/component/beyla/ebpf/internal/config`
([README](../../internal/component/beyla/ebpf/internal/config/gen/README.md)); the
config surface is intentionally not a 1:1 mirror of Beyla's YAML.

## Bumping the version

1. Edit `BEYLA_VERSION` in the `Makefile`.

2. Record the new release's tarball checksums, and review the diff:

   ```
   make update-beyla-checksums
   ```

   This writes `internal/component/beyla/ebpf/internal/config/gen/beyla-checksums.txt`
   (committed, sha256sum format). `make download-beyla` verifies downloads against it,
   so a compromised upstream can't swap in a binary we didn't review — the committed
   checksum is the trust anchor, like `go.sum`.

3. Download the binaries and schema, and sync the docs version:

   ```

>    make beyla

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   make update-beyla
```
Why not just run a "update-beyla" target that does the whole update, including updating the checksums? You could even state the Beyla version that you want to update to, in the command line argument?

Author: done, `make update-beyla TAG=<ver>` now records checksums, downloads+verifies the binary, fetches the schema, and syncs the docs version, all in one
